[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Raja yoga is the path that
takes you step by step through
all the different phases all
the way up to what's called
the Dharmamegha samadhi,
where you completely disappear
into the vastness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Ancient Sanskrit texts
describe Raja yoga as being
the ultimate goal
of yoga practice.
Often referred to
as the royal yoga,
because of its
Sanskrit meaning king,
raja yoga deals directly with
controlling and transcending
the thoughts of the mind
through deep meditation.
>> The king is within us.
Our soul is the
king who is ruling
over all our body, our mind, our
intelligence, our conscience.
>> If the mind can be
made still and pure,
says the "Bhagavad Gita," the
true self will automatically,
instantaneously shine forth.
>> What is Raja yoga?
The way soul descended
from divinity
and came down to the
materialistic plane
or God caught with excellence.
Reversing that path,
the path of ascension.
That is Raja yoga--
the path of ascension,
which is to be taken by
any soul who travels back
from where we came down.
So paradise lost.
Now paradise is to
be the regained.
[LAUGHTER]
>>It is a state, a situation
of body, mind, and heart.
When you are fully
satisfied, then you
live like a king in this world.
>> Raja yoga actually
is a very broad area.
It includes many
techniques that will help,
including Hatha yoga.
Hatha yoga is the more
physical practices
such as asana pranayama.
These physical practices also
have a very strong effect
on our mind.
So they are considered
part of raja yoga.
>> Raja yoga meditation connects
the mind directly to the source
of spiritual power.
That pure source is seen as the
ruler or the king of our lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In Raja yoga, we start
to understand the mind,
recognize the mind
for what it is,
and learn how to work with it
and change it in a positive way
that we choose.
So we can become
essentially kings
of kings or queens of queens--
really masters of our own
mind rather than victims
of our mind.
And ultimately Raja
yoga translates
into meditation, which is maybe
the most advanced technique
of mind control.
>> One of the oldest
systems of yoga,
Raja follows closely the more
renounciate path outlined
in Patanjali's eightfold system,
making it one of the most
difficult paths to traverse.
>> Raja yoga follows potentially
Yoga Sutras based on eight
steps or eight parts.
It's a step-by-step process--
first starting with
the physical posture
of finding physical comfort,
which is basically asana.
>> In meditation
when the person sits,
asana is very important where
you keep the body very relaxed
and the spine straight and
eyes fixed on the point between
the eyebrows-- the Kutastha
center, as it is called.
>> Then learning how to focus on
the breath and how to regulate
the breath and
reduce the breath,
which we can call pranayama.
>> The quieting of the breath,
recognizing the in breath,
being able to hold
the in breath.
Recognizing the out
breath and then being
able to hold the out breath.
>> Through that
pranayam process,
the soul then accesses intuitive
perceptions of the divine
realms.
>> Automatically when you
are reducing your breath,
your mind is going to slow down.
And you are naturally
going to start
withdrawing your attention
from the outside world
towards your own inner
experience, which
is called pratyahara
and then learning
how to keep them
mind more focused
and not allowing it to
wander in imagination, which
is the next major challenge,
which is called concentration
in dharana.
>> It literally means holding.
We were given the
instruction to hold to Earth,
to sit and gaze and thread your
thoughts into an acknowledgment
and an appreciation of
Earth for a full month
and train your mind to
honor and to recognize
the power and the beauty
of the water outside,
to recognize the sunrise,
the noon time, the sunset
as well as the darkness
and then breath
into wind to see that that which
moves the leaves of the trees
is the same force that
moves our body, that
moves with our breath, with
the waves of the ocean,
with the passing of the clouds.
And these dharanas
build into meditation--
[MUSIC PLAYING]
--where whatever
your focus, we're
able to place ourselves
for a sustained period
through the quieting of
the body in the breath
and through that concentration
into a state of meditation.
>> The experience of the
opening of consciousness,
it's called dhyana, which
opens you to the entire world
of possible subtle experience.
It happens on its own.
You can't make it happen.
And then that
experience culminates
in what's called samadhi, the
utter absorption in the very
subtlest states
of consciousness,
which is progressive.
Now there are many, many
types of samadhi, samadhis
in which you become immersed in
a form like a mantra or a light
and a samadhi where
you're completely absorbed
in formless consciousness.
And "The Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali"
actually gives all
these experiences.
But you can't really understand
them from reading the text.
You need a teacher.
You need an adept
to really explain
to you what the amazing
intricacy of the path of raja
yoga.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the most influential
gurus on the Raja path was
a yogi named Swami Vivekananda.
His interpretations of
Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras"
was published in 1896.
Raja yoga became
an instant success
and was highly influential
in the Western understanding
of yoga.
>> Vivekananda was a very
bright, brilliant young man.
He was basically a
member of this society
called Brahmo Samaj.
By nature, you
know, from birth, he
was deeply attracted
to a meditative life.
That was his spontaneous
and real nature.
So he was born an adept,
true yogi in that sense.
He would go into deep
depths during meditation
and it was a great task
for Sri Ramakrishna
to bring him out of
that and make him work
for the welfare of the world.
So in that sense, you may say
his basic drift was personally,
he was given to a deeply
meditative and contemplative
life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Decades later
in the early 1970s,
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi came to
America and helped legitimize
the practice of meditation as a
viable health treatment through
a simpler technique he
devised called transcendental
meditation or TM.
>> To attain this, they have
to have a deep and clear
experience of being.
>> My master was his Holiness
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi--
when I was a student
in university 1977,
I listened about him.
Later I got initiation from him.
And then I realized that
meditation is not an act.
It's the effortless effort.
So it is just
simplest and natural.
And it is our ownness.
We can experience
it intuitionally.
Through intuition, we
experience absoluteness.
And it's a
traditional technique.
We can say in this technique
we utilize body, mind,
and heart together.
>> So it takes practice.
It takes a commitment really in
the beginning to be a seeker.
>> But for the dedicated
student who really wants to use
a technology to be able to
sustain and manage their lives,
then they're going
to work on this.
They're going to work
on it every single day.
>> Bring our attention
just that, relax.
Gentle breaths.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Recent studies have proven
that meditation improves focus,
increases brain and immune
function, decreases pain,
symptoms of depression, stress,
anxiety, and improves memory.
But how exactly does meditation
affect consciousness and why?
>> First of all, what
is consciousness?
One way of thinking of
it is simply awareness.
That's like the mystery is
how am I aware of anything?
How am I aware of myself?
So that's consciousness.
But it's bigger than that.
So we know from
the neurosciences
that your conscious awareness
is a very thin slice.
And you have a huge amount
of unconscious processes
going on all the time.
>> The human beings-- our
conscious mind is only 5%.
We are dominated by our
subconscious tendencies.
>> Through the
process of meditation,
you slowly begin to
increase that percentage.
And ultimately what you'd hope
to do is go all the way down.
If you could go
all the way down,
you'd be aware of
things that are there
and normally most people would
not even know that they exist.
>> There is a big confusion
that meditation has to do with
silencing the mind.
That's not what it is at all.
The mind's nature is loudness.
The purpose of
meditation is to make
you become aware there
is a presence in you
beyond the mind.
When you start
bringing your intention
from the conscious mind
to the subconscious
mind, your behavior,
your life changes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Just in the
beginner's meditation,
they will start going
from a state of stress,
where their brainwaves
being dominated by beta,
high frequency beta, they will
start going to middle range
beta to low range
beta to alpha theta.
When you start going into
just in the alpha state,
you are much more receptive,
much more relaxed.
Yes?
People are too wound up, man.
They're too stressed.
They're too-- just
too tightly wound, too
sense of self-importance,
my purpose, my purpose.
You have no purpose.
Be quiet for a while.
The mountain is not
asking, what is my purpose
the mountain is just there.
So meditation is
the process where
you get so silent
inside that you
start listening to existence.
Then it is not so
much your purpose.
It is purpose of
existence through you.
And that's what we call inspired
action, not ambitious action.
Ambition destroys the world.
Inspiration, vision, these
are not products of thought.
This is something subtler.
This is an event in
your consciousness.
And for that to happen, you
have capacity to see it.
If you are only dominated
by external environment
and you are looking
for meaning there,
then you will never be
able to listen to it.
So in the process
of meditation, you
start going through
this source of power.
You start having an
experience of silence.
In that silence you start
being open to seeing what is.
>> You begin to sense that
there's something within you
that's guiding you.
It's almost as though there's
this unseen hand that's
walking you through all the
activities and the events
of your life so that
you're at the right place
at the right time, and
you do the right thing.
>> Effortless action
starts to happen.
And that's when you feel a
fulfillment because then it's
purpose, not your purpose.
There is less and less of you.
So when there is
less and less of you,
then you will be less
manipulated, less stressed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> That subtle stuff that we
call consciousness or awareness
or God-ness, it's
radically creative.
And it creates inside
human awareness
just as it creates
in the outer world.
So there are many,
many layers of subtlety
that we can go through.
My personal
meditation experience
is often a feeling of sinking
deeper and deeper and deeper.
And then my awareness
will kind of expand
and I'll be in this
vast kind of realm.
Feelings will appear.
Colors will appear.
Sometimes I'll have a
sense of a being there.
But it's not particularly
exciting or colorful
or full of stories.
Many, many people
have these experiences
of moving through worlds
where you actually
see these kind of light
grids, which they say
are the precursors to
the physical world.
So there's a lot that can
arise in consciousness
in deep meditation.
And you actually can learn
how to enter these realms
and revisit these realms if you
do certain kinds of practices.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are seven
dimensions of consciousness,
which are known as
the Sapta Bhumika,
the seven dimensions
of consciousness.
When consciousness
shifts from one dimension
to the other dimension,
that's an in-between point,
a twilight zone.
That space is known
as the Satori, which
means glimpse of the truth.
Before the sun rises,
you see the rays.
The sun is not out yet,
but you see the rays.
That is known as satori.
First is self-realization
and then comes
cosmic realization, Brahma
Gyan, universal realization.
>> There is dynamism happening.
There is creativity happening
in your consciousness,
but it is not through
thought because it is not
the human mind
which is creating.
It is a global,
conscious mind, what
we call the mind of God, which
is ready to manifest that.
So through the meditation
you start listening to God,
for the lack of a better
word, because God ultimately
is a word.
There is ultimately no
being who is sitting
there saying, I am God, because
that would be very egotistical,
you see.
So that being, that which
cannot be destroyed,
that which cannot be named,
that which cannot be defined,
that which is ultimately
un-understandable,
to that I bow.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the things that the
sages of the Indian traditions,
of the yogic traditions and
the Buddhist traditions,
and indeed of Christian
mysticism, Jewish mysticism,
they all paint a picture
of these different realms.
And they call them angelic
realms or subtle realms or god
realms.
And they're realms that we enter
as our consciousness becomes
more and more subtle.
>> You start having access to
what we call Satchitananda,
more and more access to Sat--
brilliance, chit--
consciousness, ananda-- bliss.
From there, purpose,
natural purpose arises.
You don't need to fight
or struggle for it.
It is inclusive.
It is serviceful naturally.
It will uplift you and it will
uplift anybody it touches.
>> Every individual
has a unique awakening.
No two individuals can
have the same awakening.
If that happens, something
is wrong somewhere
because the universe is
ever a new, ever fresh.
It doesn't repeat itself.
Nothing in this
world is repeated.
Everything is unique.
So every individual's
awakening is unique.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It is thought that a Raja
teacher who has acquired
the highest forms of
accomplishment can transform
the subtle aspects of the body
into pure light or what is
called the rainbow
body or Dzogchen.
That is, he or she can
accelerate the frequency
of the body by spinning
it into a vortex,
dissolving the body
into light, and leaving
behind only hair,
finger, and toenails,
that which has no
nerves to be transmuted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> History says that Shiva
wanted to serve the house
of Guru Nanak.
He reincarnated as
Baba Shri Chand,
who was the elder
son of Guru Nanak.
And he was a great yogi.
Guru Nanak initiated him on
this path at the age of seven.
And through his a
Yogic practices,
he attained a golden body.
A golden body, some traditions
call these Rainbow body.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When you genuinely start to
have these experiences where
you have to be very aware that
they are as natural as walking.
It is just that a lot of
people don't understand it,
and that's OK.
That's wonderful.
But there are enough of us
now on the face of this planet
and you can find each
other now because you
have possibility of internet.
And now as you start
finding each other,
you start having conversations.
That's how we shape
the new world.
>> Up next on "Yogic Paths"--
>> When you tighten up in
life, that's called kunda.
Every realm of you is confined.
You are like that.
And lini means to bloom it out.
>> Kundalini is bio
energy, living energy,
conscious energy.
So once this energy
is activated,
we perceive the word
entirely in a fresh way.
>> And if you're blessed, you'll
have several experiences of it.
And if you're not, you'll maybe
come back in another lifetime
and get it.
So there's no rush.
[MUSIC PLAYING]